# Understanding computer hardware

**Weight 2**\
Key Knowledge Areas

• Hardware

Partial list of the used files, terms and utilities

• Motherboards, processors, power supplies, optical drives, peripherals
• Hard drives, solid state disks and partitions, /dev/sd*
• Drivers

---

## Power supplies

- normalize sources of power
- consuming power generates heat : use of fans and heat sinks

## Motherboard

- normalize interface to hardware with standard connectors
- use programs for hardware configuration stored in nonvolatile memory
- non volatile memory : BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)
  - identifying, loading, and transferring operation to an OS
  - support larger disks, diagnostics, graphical interfaces, networking
- EFI / UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface) - BIOS standard made by INTEL

## Memory

- RAM (Random Access Memory) : hold data of running applications
- different physical implementation like DIMM, SIMM or DDR
- SWAP is used if RAM is full
- `free -m` for info about RAM

## Processors

- process information / make computation
- CPU *(Central Processing Unit)* / GPU *(Graphical Processing Unit)* are part of a processor
  - **i386**
References the 32-bit instruction set associated with the Intel 80386.
  - **x86**
Typically references the 32-bit instruction sets associated with successors to the 80386 such as
80486, 80586, and Pentium.
  - **x64 / x86-64**
References processors that support both the 32-bit and 64-bit instructions of the x86 family.
  - **AMD**
A reference to x86 support by AMD processors.
  - **AMD64**
A reference to x64 support by AMD processors.
  - **ARM**
References a Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) CPU that is not based on the x86
instruction set. Commonly used by embedded, mobile, tablet, and battery operated devices. A
version of Linux for ARM is used by the Raspberry Pi.

- `/proc/cpuinfo` or `lscpu` for CPU info
  - **Bit size** : 32-bit or 64-bit - If an application needs access to more than 4 GB of memory then it must run on a 64-bit
  - **Clock Speed** : in MHz or GHz - how fast is a CPU
  - **Cache** : high-speed buffer between CPUs and system memory. Cache is separated into
multiple layers, commonly referenced as L1, L2, L3 and even L4
  - **Cores** : number of physical CPU

## Storage

- HDD *(Hard Disk Drives)*: physical disks with magnetic band - moving parts
- SSD *(Solid State Drives)* : microchip - no moving parts
- Storage Interfaces:
  - SCSI *(Small Computer System Interface)*
  - SATA *(Serial AT Attachment)*
  - PCIe *(Peripheral Component Interconnect Express)*
- RAID *(Redundant Array of Independent Disks)*
  - RAID 0 (split data in 2 disks)
  - RAID 1 (mirroring)
  - RAID 5 (split in 4 disk with parity)
- `lsblk` : list block devices

## Partitions

- see these storage locations as multiple independent sequences
- Logical Volume Manager (LVM) is a software capability that allows administrators
to combine individual disks and disk partitions

## Peripherals

- Peripherals are the devices that provide systems with input, output, and access to the rest of the real world.
- System on a Chip (SoC) : single package for CPU,RAM,SSD. Often use for smartphones

## Drivers

- No need for developpers to deal with details for each peripherals
- Normalize access to devices
- Devices are in `/dev`
  - `sd` for storage device
  - `a` for the first physical device
  - `/dev/sda3` for the third partition of first physical device storage
  - `mmcblk` memory-cards
