# Searching and extracting data

**Weight 3**\
Key Knowledge Areas

- Command line pipes
- I/O redirection
- Basic Regular Expressions using `.` `[ ]` `*` and `?`

Partial list of the used files, terms and utilities

- `grep`
- `less`
- `cat`, `head`, `tail`
- `sort`
- `cut`
- `wc`

---

## I/O Redirection

### Standard Output (stdout)

- `echo "Hello World!" > text` : operator `>` redirect standard normal output (`stdout`) - create a new file or overwrite if exist
- `echo "Hello World!" >> text` : add new information to text file

### Standard Error (stderr)

- `find /usr games 2> text-error` : operator `2>` redirect standard error output (`stderr`)
- `/dev/null` : bit bucket (a file that accepts input and doesn’t do anything with it)

### Standard intput (stdin)

- `cat < text` or `tr -d "l" < text`
- `<<` operator acts in a different way. This input stream is also called *here document*.

### Combination

- `find /usr games &>> text-error` : `&` is combination of channel 1 (stdout) and channel 2 (stderr)

### CLI Pipes

- `ls -l | head | wc -w`

### Useful Commands

- `cut`
Removes sections from each line of a file.
- `cat`
Displays or concatenates files.accueil des artistes
- `find`
Searches for files in a directory hierarchy.
- `less`
Displays a file, allowing the user to scroll one line at the time.
- `more`
Displays a file, a page at the time.
- `head`
Displays the first 10 lines of a file.
- `tail`
Displays the last 10 lines of a file.
- `sort`
Sorts files.
- `wc`
Counts by default the lines, words or bytes of a file.
- `grep` : *global regular expression print* - search within files
  - `-i`
the search is case insensitive
  - `-r`
the search is recursive (it searches into all files within the given directory and its
subdirectories)
  - `-c`
the search counts the number of matches
  - `-v`
invert the match, to print lines that do not match the search term
  - `-E`
turns on extended regular expressions (needed by some of the more advanced meta-characters
like | , + and ?)

### Regular expressions

- `.`
Match any single character (except newline)
- `[abcABC]`
Match any one character within the brackets
- `[^abcABC]`
Match any one character except the ones in the brackets
- `[a-z]`
Match any character in the range
- `[^a-z]`
Match any character except the ones in the range
- `sun|moon`
Find either of the listed strings
- `^`
Start of a line
- `$`
End of a line
- `*`
Zero or more of the preceding pattern
- `+`
One or more of the preceding pattern
- `?`
Zero or one of the preceding pattern
